Now we will briefly examine the general
structure of project management disciplines.
What are the main elements it consists of?
At the beginning of the course in
the interview, I said that
we would consider the entire material,
adhering to international standards.
The standards are recommended
and used by the
International
Project Management
Association.
Well, we use Russian norms,
namely the NTC of Russia, the National
Competence Requirement
in the field of project management.
Here the general methodological approach
is such that the entire volume of project
management, the entire volume of
project management disciplines
or the content of this part of human
knowledge is divided into three
main components.
These are the objects of management, the
subjects of management and the process of management.
Here we will briefly stop on
each of these components.
One of the main management
objects is the project.
We briefly considered it.
Now we will consider some aspects
of this management object.
Thus, the objects of management include
the project, the program of projects,
the portfolio or portfolios of projects,
the systems, the project-
oriented organizations,
the life cycle of the management
object and its phases.
If we consider the project from the point
of view of a systemic approach, then
I have already said that the project approach
is primarily a process approach.
Systemically, the project
is considered as a single phenomenon,
inseparable and connected.
This phenomenon has a goal at the
entrance, and it is also a single or
unifying goal of the whole project,
and at the exit a single result.
Thus we see that the project can really
be considered as a single phenomenon,
which covers all the components
of activity, one way
or another, involved
in the project.
And in general, if we consider a project,
the aim of any project is to change
the state of the system in which
the project is implemented or which
interacts with the project, from the
state before the project
to the state after the project.
In other words, we understand that if
we want to perform a project, then
first we must investigate what the
purpose of this project is, what will
the implementation of this project
lead to, what will change as a
result of the implementation of
this project.
In this regard, we would like to focus
more on the relationship between the objectives
and objectives of the project.
Often in practice it happens that even
the manager, the project manager
does not quite clearly share the goals
and tasks.
I have given an example of Stonehenge, and I hope
you have already felt the difference,
the inner difference in the essence of
the purpose of the project and the task.
The goal of the project is what we
should lead our system to.
Usually the project is carried
out in an organization.
This organization is called
a parent organization.
The organization in which the project
is implemented is called the
parent organization.
So, first of all, the goal
of the project is to change
the state of the parent organization
as a result of the
project.
And we need to understand clearly that we can
somehow indicate the purpose of the project.
But if we indicate the goal of the project
vague, diffuse, it will lead to the
fact that we will spend significant
additional resources in
the execution of the project.
Hence the requirement to define the purpose.
The goal should not be simply
qualitative, describe the
qualitative result of the project,
but it should go away
from pluralism, ambiguity and should
be expressed in clear digital
indicators.
So, the project begins with the fact
that we define its purpose.
This is called project
management.
Naturally, the goal we
must define as accurately
as we can, not using only
the general quality parameters,
but above all using
quantitative parameters.
If we talk specifically about some project,
I will briefly give, for example,
a project in the field of
information technology.
Usually, in information technology,
the purpose of the project implies
the implementation of a particular
system.
Let us briefly consider the example
of implementing a project management
system, which is closest to our
course theme.
In particular, let's say
we are considering a project to
implement the Microsoft Project
Management tool.
Many managers believe that the
aim of this project is to develop
and implement a project management
system or to launch, install,
in other words, this
Microsoft Project tool.
However, if we look at this event
as a whole, we will see that the
purpose of this project is a
bit different.
This tool is implemented
to increase the
productivity of work,
say, 20 managers
or 20 project
managers.
And from this point of view, it
is more correct to talk about the goal
of the project as the increase of the
productivity of the work of a given
pool of resources, which includes
20 project managers, a certain department,
which is part of a department
or other division
of the enterprise.
At the same time, we need to define the
parameters of this goal more clearly.
For example, to increase
the productivity of 20 employees
of the Information Technology
Department who are engaged
in project management.
And not all projects
in a row, but projects,
say, of medium-sized scale.
We will talk about these parameters later.
So, we fix the goal of the project where
we should come after the project
is implemented.
These are the parameters
of labor productivity.
In this case, we can identify
the goal as point A.
Where do we go?
We also need to know where we are from.
We are coming from point B.
We need to know where we are
before we complete the project.
And where we must come
as a result of the project.
In practice, this event, the definition
or clarification of the purpose, as
a rule, takes place at a working meeting,
at a meeting with the management.
Suppose if the project is important
and captures the entire organization,
then it is usually a meeting
with the CEO.
The purpose of the project is clearly defined.
The project is designed with specific
digital indicators.
But this component, determining
where we are in the organization
before the start of the project,
is called a pre-
project survey.
And from the point of view of
the document of turnover, here
is the protocol of the pre-
project survey, and here
is, say, the protocol of the
meeting with the general director.
A protocol with the analysis
of the need for the start of this project.
If we have a pre-design
survey not exactly, and here the
parameters are not very accurately
fixed, then we will go from
this state to the goal, covering
such an area.
Here, under the area, we can
understand the cost of resources that
are necessary for us to the project's goal.
Hence it is obvious that if we are
to as a result of the pre-
project survey more accurately
and carefully fix the parameters,
let us say, with such error, then
we will need significantly less
resources to implement
the project and its goals.
We can use such resources.
The same applies to the accuracy and unambiguity
of the fixation of the project's purpose.
If we do not have the project'
s goal defined, then as a result
we will be forced to spend
much more resources.
Ideally, we spend resources
that can be depicted on this
chart by a shortcut or a section
from point B to point A.
This is the ideal case when our area
is degenerating into a line.
And we must strive in any
project to provide this condition,
which can be expressed mathematically
as follows.
The amount of all costs should be minimized.
This is our main condition that we must
observe when starting, when determining
the purpose of the project.
Thus, we fix the goal, fix
the current state of pre-
project or pre-project.
Next we define the way we
will go from point A to point
B.
That is, we have fixed the point
where we need to come as a result
of the project.
We have a pre-project state analysis,
point B.
And we determine the ways we
can move from state B to
state A.
maybe there is a way,
and there can be several
such options.
From these options we choose
the optimal path, based on the condition
we have now considered,
the minimum cost.
This is usually the shortest
way from B to A.
We found this path, we recorded it.
And now we begin to determine
what tasks we need to solve,
what work we need to do, moving
from point B along this path
to point A.
And so we break our way into
separate blocks of tasks,
tasks and work that we must solve
in order to the project'
s goal.
So, we understand that the goals of the
project and the goals of the project are
different entities.
And the more carefully, the more
deeply we feel the inner content,
the inner essence of these basic
concepts, the easier it will
be for us to organize this
whole event, to perform it.
The more efficient, the
more professional we can
deal with project management.
The purpose of the project is the desired
result of the activity achieved
as a result of the successful completion
and completion of the project under certain
conditions of its implementation.
Project management is another
concept, such as project strategy.
Project strategy is generally understood
as the whole set of techniques, technologies,
techniques, plans, which describe
the ways of planning the
organization and the characteristics
of the project outcome.
The objectives of the project are
a full set of activities, works,
through which the goal of the project
is achieved.
The next basic concept used when
describing a project management
object is the project structure.
The structure of the project is usually
described based on hierarchical
structures, either from top to bottom
or from bottom to top.
And these structures of the project
affect the purpose of the project, the
objectives of the project.
The project structures can describe the
whole complex of problems that need
to be solved during the project execution.
This structure is corresponding to the
so-called problem tree.
Furthermore, we may have a structure describing
the results or decisions of the project.
This structure is called the Tree of Decision.
If we carefully write the entire
list of works, then we can also
structure this list
of works in a hierarchical way
and get the so-called structural
decomposition of works.
Similarly, we can structurate
and decompose the project team,
starting from the project
manager and ending with the ordinary
executives, team members.
In English literature, the
generally accepted term Breakdown
is used, which can be approximately
translated into Russian
decomposition.
Any project structure uses
this breakdown or decomposition
technology, or, in scientific
language, the method of
analysis, which allows us
to structure a problem,
a task, from top to bottom
hierarchically.
This breakdown method, too, can be
said, is as old as the world.
And if we take the Bible, for
example, one of the examples
that is mentioned there also
uses this method.
In particular, it is said that even
a strong man will not be able to
cope with the problem of breaking the
crochet, and even a weak child
will cope with this problem if he dissolves
the crochet on separate components,
on separate branches.
In the practice of design activities
this method is used very widely,
and it is really effective.
If you have any problem, try
to allocate a resource, allocate
time and carry out decomposition,
break down the problem into components,
and then step by step, moving
from one part to another, you
can gradually solve the entire
problem, find answers to all
the questions asked.
In English-language literature,
a widely accepted abbreviation
is used, which corresponds
to the structure of
the project.
I have already said that we can
use such a structure as the organizational
structure of the project.
Organization Breakdown
Structure, or OBS
in English.
Such an abbreviation will be met
with us in the know, and we must understand
what is behind it.
SDR is the abbreviation
for Work Breakdown
Structure,
or VBS.
These abbreviations will also be used.
Moreover, both of the abbreviation
OBS, VBS is widely used
in the most common
project management tools
such as Microsoft Project,
Primovera, Spyder and
others.
Here on the slide you can see a very
simple picture of the hierarchical
model of the project structure.
For example, at the top level,
if we consider, say, the
project's organizational structure
or project team, at the top
level we have a project
manager.
Next next level.
His deputy as the deputy
project manager can be roles
such as project coordinator
or project administrator,
or project chief engineer,
or project expert,
and so on.
The next level, the third, we
can consider, suppose, managers
in individual directions.
We call them linear managers or
linear engineers who perform
functions in one or another component
of the project subject area.
At the bottom level, we have
the executives directly present.
This is understandable in principle.
Such a structure, such a display allows
us to very quickly and effectively
determine what a particular structural
representation of the project
consists of.
If we talk, say, about structuring
a goal, then a general or general
goal is put at the forefront,
and it can be decomposed
or disintegrated into separate
sub-objectives.
The same is with tasks.
If, for example, one of our
main tasks is building a
building, then we can decompose
this task into components in
chronological
sequence, or in functional,
or in object, and so
on.
For example, in chronological
sequence, the construction of
a building can be represented
in this form.
We determine the purpose of the building,
the technique of economic justification,
then the technical task or private
technical task, then the sketch project,
then the technical project, then
the working project.
It is clear that at the same
time we can perform
such work as solving the issue
of land removal, solving the issue
of licensing for the land
plot, then a task block
related to consideration,
approval in the relevant
instances, project documentation
for this building, communication
submission, task block
related to anepidemonadzor,
task block related
to energy supply,
ecology and so on.
Here is the structural presentation of
the project in different sections, it
significantly facilitates the
planning of the project.
Furthermore, we can systematically approach
the organization of the entire project,
the execution of the project, step by step
moving from specific levels of the hierarchy,
without forgetting anything at the same
time in each structure.
That is, at the same time we observe the
principle of full coverage for each representation
of the structure.
It often happens that in the real execution
of the project, the participants
of the project, different legal entities
and even individuals, even members
of the same team understand differently
what a successful
project is.
There are such case situations when
one participant, one team member believes
that the project is completed and
completed very successfully,
but the other participant categorically
insists that the project is
completed unsuccessfully.
In order to avoid such conflicts
in project management there is a whole
section, which is called the
criteria of success and failure
of the project or otherwise sometimes
called the criteria of failure.
When we start working on a project
in the process of initiating
project activities, in the process
of planning, we must pay attention,
allocate the resources to
clearly determine what we
will consider a successful
project.
Moreover, the metrics themselves, the
parameters by which we will measure
these successful characteristics, we
must clearly define and agree with
all participants in the project,
with all members of the project
team involved in the project activities.
For each metrics we determine
success, we must record
success indicators.
That is, for example, we can
choose time as a metric, and we can
say that yes, if the project
is completed in a certain period
of time, say, 14 months, then
we will consider it to be completed
successfully.
Here, the metric is the time, and the indicator
is the value, 14 months.
It is clear that the indicator
itself is also determined
with some error, and we
must fix this error.
Sometimes it is called the level
of assumptions, sometimes it is called
the level of tolerance, but in any
case we must fix the criterion
or metrics by which we will determine
the success of the project,
the indicator - the value of this
value, and the error that we
can allow when measuring the
success indicator.
That is, we can record, say,
by time, that we have 14 months,
well, at the same time we say
that error is allowed plus-
minus one month.
If the project is completed
within this error, it is successfully
completed using this parameter.
Similarly, other parameters,
such as the budget, are used.
Let's say we have a project budget
of one million rubles, and we
must fit in that million rubles, plus-
minus, let's say 100 thousand rubles.
We have an error of estimating the budget of
100 thousand rubles.
If we consider what are the internal
reasons for assessing the error of
these parameters, how to objectively
evaluate them and what they are related
to, then we are one way or another
relying on what is associated with
risks, with uncertainties in the
course of the project.
All the uncertainties in the
course of planning the organization
of the project, summarizing just
and should give us these assumptions,
plus-minus.
It is clear that all these
uncertainties and risks, they depend
in large part on the internal conditions
of the project, that is, within the
organization where the project
is performed, and on the external conditions,
but above all these uncertainties
and risks depend on the professionalism
of the project participants,
the team members, and above
all the project management,
and in particular the project
manager himself.
The criteria for success are usually divided
into three areas, three main types.
The traditional type is such criteria
of success, as we have already said,
time, budget, requirements
for quality in accordance
with the project and accounting documentation.
The second type of criteria
is the type of criteria that
the customer or a participant,
a legal entity, determines,
and these criteria are specific.
For example, one of the participants,
which may be a particular governmental
organization, it presents requirements
to the outcome of the
project such that this outcome,
product or service, accompanied
by certification, and
that product or service
must be officially issued
paper, document, certificate,
which fixes certain parameters,
specific parameters
of the project.
In addition to these two types, there
is a third one that fixes benefits
for individual participants
in the project.
It is clear that for, say, a project
customer who is interested
in, first of all, to receive a product
or service, the benefit we can
count directly in the amount
in which we have received the
product or service, and we can then
re-calculate the benefit in such
a way that the customer, having
received the product or service,
will receive dividends or profit
expressed in financial and economic
equivalent, and this
profit can be calculated,
say, on the scale of year.
And then we say that as a result
of the implementation of this project
the customer received a new product
or service, and this product or
service allows you to get
an annual profit in such a amount.
For, say, the general contractor,
the benefit is that, implementing
this project, he receives a financial
compensation for the
fact that his resources participated
in this project and
so on.
In the project activity, the environment
of the project is a very important
parameter.
Under the project environment we understand
the environment in which the project
is immersed, which is characterized
by various parameters, for example,
the socio-economic environment, the
legal environment, the
technological environment, up to
the geographical or organizational
environment.
It is clear that the same project with the
same subject area can be implemented
differently in the conditions of Russia
and in the conditions of the United
States or in the conditions of Malaysia.
And here we are just facing the fact that the
external environment of the project has a
strong influence on its implementation.
In addition to dividing the environment
into the external, we also need to
understand that there are internal components.
It can also be attributed to the project
environment, but it is an
internal environment.
That is, the project is immersed
in a certain environment,
and the interaction within the team,
within the team, within the enterprise
and all these conditions in which the
project is implemented, from this
point of view, we consider
as internal conditions of
the environment.
More in full factors of the external
environment of the project
are listed in this slide.
These are components that can affect
a project in a fairly significant
way, and we must definitely
take them into account.
As I have said, these
are political conditions,
economic conditions, legal,
legal, cultural, national,
natural, geographical
conditions.
Naturally, conditions that
are characterized by our partners
or competitors to conduct
business directly in our area
or in related areas.
There are other factors that influence
infrastructure.
When we approach the process
of project management, it is very important
that in the project team, in the
team, in the organization
where we implement the project,
we speak the language that
is most appropriate.
We speak and use those concepts,
terms that all our participants,
both individuals and legal
entities, understand uniformly.
If we consider one of the
basic regulations of project management
used in the enterprise, such as
the project management regulation,
then literally in the first
section, as a rule, there is
a votary, or a section that
describes the main concepts,
terms and definitions.
This section clearly sets out both
qualitative and quantitative parameters
of certain definitions.
For example, if we use the concept
of morje in design activities,
then a formula is required.
If we use more detailed concepts,
say, gross or net, then
final formulas
are also used.
If we use the concept of
profit, it is clearly fixed what
it is, as it is considered.
And including varieties
that are used by this term
in the company.
For example, a concept such
as gross profit, or there
final profit, or operating
profit, and so on can be used.
If we do not fix these concepts
within the project team or on
the enterprise, then we can
have significant conflicts.
Conflicts can occur between project
participants, between team members
and even within the management.
For example, if I play
a role in a project team,
and if my motivation depends,
say, on morje, I can calculate
that motivation in
this way.
I will get a certain number.
That is, if I consider, let's
say, that my motivation affects
the variable salary component, which
is paid, let's say, once a quarter,
and I calculate it in a certain
way, then upon reaching the moment
of payment of this variable component,
someone of the key employees,
top managers, taking for the
definition of morje another
formula, can calculate it,
and it, the figure, will be
completely different.
Then we begin to agree.
One participant expects that
he will have such a component,
and he is charged, say,
several times less.
Of course, this is a source of very
strong conflicts, and this all leads
to the fact that we have the project
in the efficiency of its implementation.
Even the term “efficiency of
the project” we must describe very
carefully in the votary.
If we use a professional
design approach, then we must
inevitably get away from ambiguity,
from multiplicity and come
to unambiguity.
If we use the term project
performance efficiency, we must clearly
understand that this wording can
be understood by each team
member or project participant in
their own way.
In order to avoid these different
interpretations, we explain
in the votary what the effectiveness
of the project is.
As a rule, the effectiveness of the
project is understood as the fact that
the project will be completed within
the scheduled parameters that
we have fixed in the initiation
and planning phase in the
initial periods of the project.
The effectiveness of the project
is understood as the result of the
project achieved within these
planning parameters, the quantity
and quality of the project
result corresponds to the
project documentation.
And under the effectiveness of the project
we will understand the moment that it
is performed with maximum resource savings.
And here is introduced
such a fundamental and very
important concept, which is
used in project activities,
as a return on investment,
or in English, a roy rate.
Return is an investment.
As it is specifically considered,
we will look at the section
that affects project cost management.
But in general, the return on investment
is characterized by how many, for
example, copies of profit we will
get as a result of the
project for each ruble invested
in the project.
Or, in other words, how many cents
of profit we will get from the project
completed for each dollar invested
in the project.
It is an integral characteristic
of the project performance efficiency,
and it is very often used.
This is already a digital expression of the term efficiency.
In the future, we will always under the
term efficiency immediately automatically
understand that if we are talking
about increasing efficiency,
then we are talking about increasing
the project roy or about increasing
the staff schedule roy.
The concept of roy of staff schedule
is also introduced, that is,
the return on investment in personnel.
We will talk about it too a little later.
And the second section in the
main regulations on project management
in each enterprise, as I have already
said, for example, this project
management provision, can
be a project classifier.
We will now look at the
classification of projects.
The classification of projects can
also be carried out by different
metrics, by different parameters.
As a rule, experts in the field of project
management methodology strive to
cover as many parameters as
possible, to classify
projects as accurately as possible.
But here it is worth paying attention
to the fact that the more
complex the classification, the
more parameters in the classification,
the more resources we will spend on defining
the classification, and the more difficult
we will be to work with the results
of the classification, with the
choice of methods and tools for
project management.
But in general, the role of the project
classifier is very and very important
in project activities.
This is why this section is placed
in the second place in the position
of project management.
It is clear that if we deal with
some small project, a short-
term project, a small scale, then
the requirements for the project
management process, procedures,
tools, technologies will
be defined, and this is usually
not very labor-consuming
simple management schemes.
If we are talking about
a complex, complex, large-
scale, high-budget project, then
here the demand in project
management methods is very high.
We cannot spend expensive
management, technological,
methodical resources
on managing small projects.
That is, suitable for managing the entire
spectrum of projects in the enterprise,
we must consciously, strategically,
measurably choose one or another
approach.
That is why there is a classifier.
That is, if you imagine the entire
machine of project management
of the enterprise in the form of
a black box, then at the entrance
we have all the projects,
and at the exit we have this mixture
is chaotic or semi-chaotic,
it is already structured,
and all the projects are
placed on the shelves.
Each shelf corresponds to a certain
set of techniques and technologies.
Each of the shelves has its own implementation scheme.
Each already classified type of
project will be optimally executed
using certain resources, schemes,
implementation procedures.
Thus, we understand the importance
of the classifier and classification
of projects.
Let us briefly look at the examples of classification.
In the slide we have given an example
of classification by several parameters.
This, I would emphasize, is an example.
Such parameters can
be much more.
So, by size, we can
classify projects as follows.
Multiprojects, monoprojects
and programmes.
A monoproject is a project that
usually contains a similar
type of activity or a similar
type of subject component.
For example, a monoproject is
the supply of servers for IT projects,
and if we have a territorial distributed
object, that is, we need to put
two servers of this type across
the entire territory of Russia
to all subjects of the Federation.
This is a monoproject, and here the
substance is the same type.
But if in addition to the supply
of this server economy we still need
to solve other tasks, let's say,
we need to create a network
of communication, optical fiber
line to carry or lines.
We need to connect satellite
communication, we need to connect
equipment, active network,
switches, routers.
We need to solve the problems with
the telephone, to put
institutional automated telephone
stations.
We need to solve problems with
time, service, billing subsystem,
we need to solve problems
related to information
security, we need to solve problems
that close the entire
complex of construction
readiness.
This is no longer a mono project,
but a multi-project.
Multi-project contains several
different types, can contain
several different types of projects
in its subject area.
Projects can be of the same type,
varied type, and so on.
If we talk about a large complex
of projects, about a group of projects
united by a common goal, then
we are talking about a program of projects.
This term is commonly used when
it comes to a significant
number of projects covering
different areas, functional,
plus significant areas the
project can cover.
And at the same time, the whole complex
of these projects we call a program,
a program of projects.
We will stop on the programs
again later.
According to the field of activity,
the classification may also be different.
Well, here is an example of the division
of the following, technical projects,
organizational, economic,
social, mixed.
Technical projects are those
projects that implement
some new technical solution,
or a certain technical
solution we need to implement
it.
Organizational projects are usually
related to the creation of a new
organizational structure, either
reorganization of the staff schedule,
or change of the enterprise units.
Economic projects usually
involve a change in the type
of property, for example.
Social projects aim to change
the status of social groups or
provide them, for example,
a project to improve the provision
of primary school teachers.
It is a social project.
Any complex project
can be considered
mixed.
This includes a part of technical
projects, and organizational
and economic, and so on.
For example, if we consider the project
to launch a space mission to Mars,
it is clear that there are different
components here.
There is a technical component,
and there is an organizational, and
there is an economic.
In general, this is a mixed project,
and here sometimes a parameter is
disaggregated, which is called
the project purpose.
Investment, innovation,
research and education.
It is clear what is at the basis of
this division.
If we implement a project so
that we have investments, investments,
and have their dividends,
such a project is often
called an investment.
If we have a component in
the project that is characterized
by the fact that we apply
some innovations, or innovations
in the field of technology, or
methodical or instrumental,
it is an innovative
project.
Research projects, it is clear
that here is the basis.
Let's say, the event that we
can talk about in this video
course, we can call this
project educational.
The same project, referring to the
assistant mission to Mars, can be
characterized as mixed in
terms of the metrics of the classification
of the project by purpose.
Because it is clear that this is a project
both investment and innovative.
He is both research and, of
course, he may have a
component of educational.
There is also usually a distribution
of funding.
Generally, the division goes
to small, medium, large projects.
But this division, it is such a specific
nature, for example, in a small private
firm such division has a graduation
into one, and if we take a large international
corporation, then there
is the concept of small, medium,
large project, they are already
different.
For example, if in the first case
we have small projects
that can be characterized by
a maximum budget, say, $50,
000, then for international
corporations small projects
are projects that have a budget,
say, less than $100
million.
That is, we see that the
classification depends significantly
on the type of business, and the external
and internal environment, and
the structures, and many other parameters.
Often use the classification
of projects by time,
chronology, duration.
In some organizations
short-term projects
are used, and this classifier
can show us that if
we are dealing with a short-
term project, its duration
does not exceed one year.
Medium-term projects from one to three
years, well, and long-term, let'
s say, above three years.
If we consider classification
by time, then it is interesting to
analyze or consider the analysis
of the statistics of the duration
of projects by time.
For example, if we take Western Europe,
then in the field of information
technology, having collected all the
statistics on duration, we can see
that usually the maximum duration of
projects of this type is in 3 years,
and projects with a duration
of 50 years are very few, projects
with a duration of
500 years are very few.
And if we are really professionally
interested in project management,
then we analyze the classification
of projects by different parameters,
and this analysis can give us a
lot of interesting information
that shows how we now use our
experience, the experience
of our predecessors, the world
experience, and where, in principle,
project management can
move in general.
Here is one example – the analysis
of project statistics by time, the
distribution of projects by time.
The tail of this distribution
or long-term component, as a rule,
it, this component,
breaks in the area of 50 years,
projects with a duration of 1000
years we now almost do not observe.
However, if you read the accompanying
materials on this course carefully,
in our section “History of Project
Activities” you can see that
humanity has dealt with projects
whose results are in demand
on a scale not 50 years
and not 500 years, but on
a scale, say, 5000 years.
There are such projects, the same Stonehenge
4000 years old.
Or projects that are currently undergoing
quite real discussion, namely
the Dyson sphere project.
This is a project that will appear to
be implemented on a scale up to 3000
years, which is clear that it is
a long-term project.
In principle, it can be said that it has
already begun, since it is in the phase
of initiation, in the phase
of discussion, and it is aimed at ensuring
the normal development and existence
of our grandchildren, the
grandchildren of humanity.
I can briefly explain what the essence of
this project is.
Very interesting project.
Scientists are worried about what is
happening on Earth.
We see how intensely the
Earth's resources are being consumed,
primarily fuel and energy, and
we understand that in the near future
we will face this problem
more and more hard.
On the other hand, Tsiolkovsky said
that yes, the Earth is the cradle
of humanity, but it is not the time
for a baby to be in this cradle.
That is, we understand that sooner
or later man will leave Earth, and he
will begin to fill the surrounding
space and somehow implement
projects of his expansion.
And here is the Dyson sphere
project – one of the projects
that is directed in this direction,
namely the creation of
such an orbital complex that would
accommodate a total number of inhabitants
significantly greater than
the number we now have on Earth
– 6 billion people, and this
Dyson sphere, it would be closed,
self-sufficient,
it would not depend on
the resources on Earth and
would allow humanity to develop
already less tied to the
cradle.
I made some retreat, which, in principle,
is quite interesting, I think,
and in general one of the tasks
of this course - somehow managers
are still included in the culture
of project management and show
where humanity is moving
in management, in project
activities.
If we return to the classification
of projects, we can see a wide
variety of classification parameters.
For example, projects
can be classified
by territorial characteristics,
by division,
as we say.
If we consider the problem of creating
a classifier, then, as
I said, here we can
face a dilemma.
On the one hand, we want to enter
as many parameters as possible
to make the classification
of projects more clear.
On the other hand, we will face the
fact that we can go into
methodological research, and on the
output after the classifier we will
get a very large variety
of different types I have faced
the problems of creating a classifier
in practice, and here is
one example.
We considered the classification of
projects by duration in one of the organizations,
and when we compiled a preliminary
list of all projects, usually the
entire composition or box of
projects is also called a portfolio
of projects.
We will return to that term.
When the preliminary
portfolio of projects was compiled,
we analyzed, and what is
the minimum duration
of the projects in this enterprise.
It turned out to be two months, with
projects being conducted from two months
in duration to about eight years
in this range.
Initially, we had the setup that
we should introduce a classifier
by project duration.
After we considered that we had
a range from two months to eight
years, we began to analyze how
fundamentally our short-term
projects would differ, let'
s say up to one year or up
to three months.
Short, medium and long term.
It turned out that the main parameter of the
difference will be the characteristics of
the document of turnover and reporting.
For example, if we have short-term
projects and they take a month,
let's say, we can enter a reporting
in a day, and sometimes
in short-term projects a
daily reporting is introduced.
If we consider the specific situation
at the mentioned enterprise,
where the minimum duration
of two months for projects,
we will see that such projects,
first, very little, second, they
are not very important, well, and,
third, if we take and reduce
the reporting and sales documents,
this procedure, to weekly,
that is, reports will be made
weekly, then, in principle,
this approach can be quite
effective here.
On the other hand, reporting on
a project that we have been running
for 8 years, with a period of more
than 1 month, is not very
effective, and the management still
wants to have a weekly reporting
control system.
Thus, we come to the conclusion
that for the entire portfolio of
projects in this enterprise is
a suitable weekly reporting
system, and it makes no sense to divide
projects by time into some
internal types for us.
So we take and remove this
metric, dividing by time.
Thus, by very carefully
analyzing the creation of
a classifier, we can such
a design when it is a relatively
simple design and at the
same time solve its main
problem.
In principle, we have information
on the classification of projects in
the accompanying materials, and
you can consider it in more detail.
In general, I will repeat, the classifier
is the most important component
in the project management process.
And here one of the most important
parameters of classification can
be such a parameter as division
by importance or by priority.
If you look at the typical,
most popular project management
tools, such as Microsoft Project,
Primovera, Spyder, or others,
you will see that there is
a necessarily the concept
of “priority.”
This is when we talk about
the classification of projects, the
concept of the "priority" of the
project is also introduced, and here
the rational use of this
parameter is very important.
And if we have this parameter to be
determined very carefully,
professionally, then the return
from such a classifier will be very,
very large.
For example, we will consider projects of
enterprises of the scale of a group
of companies, Holding.
If we have projects that affect the
entire complex of the organization
at the holding level, then this project
can be assigned "highest priority",
for example, number
one.
If we consider projects that describe
the scale of the organization
of a subsidiary, we can
assign “priority number two.”
If we consider department-scale
projects within the organization,
we can assign “priority
number three.”
We can consider projects
there, say, with “priority number
four,” and it covers only
a separate group, which is
an internal unit of the department.
And we can, for example,
consider projects with a “fifth
priority” that we have is
a “background”.
For example, we enter the room, and
the head of the enterprise
says, in general, you need to
make a cosmetic repair, not the
color we have.
We understand that this project can be
immediately attributed to
the “background”, “fifth priority”, and
it is implemented in such a way that
if we have resources in the
enterprise, we are engaged in that project.
If there are no resources, we can somehow
move it, postpone it.
What does this divide priority mean?
In practice, this means the following.
At a meeting with the CEO
or the manager, where, let'
s say, I call as a project
manager and I position
myself as a project manager,
the CEO says that “yes,
this project we give
priority number three.”
This means that I can take all
the resources from the
priority number five project,
and I agree with
the priority number five
project manager.
I can take resources from the
priority number four project,
but I have to agree with
the project manager.
If in the first case, when I
took resources from project
No. 5, I only notified the
project manager, then in the
case of priority of the fourth
type I must already notify
and agree with him.
Then I can take resources from projects
with priority equal to my project,
that is, with priority
number 3.
But at the same time I
must already agree with the
head of this project, with the
head of the relevant unit.
That is, the scheme and chain
of coordinating actions are changing.
And then, if I want to take resources
from a project with priority No. 2 and
a pace with priority No. 1, the
system categorically prohibits
me from doing so.
Why is?
I have a project with priority
number 3.
Thus, this parameter, priority,
is the same parameter or leverage
that is placed in the
hands of the top management
of the enterprise or
specifically the CEO or
one of his deputy.
And if the CEO puts this parameter
in a certain way, then it immediately
determines the sequence
of allocation of resources
and the order of allocation
of resources to the project.
I can in the preliminary phase, in the initiation
phase, having received this parameter
No. 3 priority, calculate the duration
of the project within the limited
resources available to me.
Suppose it was a year and a half.
I then give these assessments
to the relevant director,
the same general director.
If this situation is suitable for him,
he says, all, there were three,
so there will be three.
We will carry out this project for a year
and a half.
If he sees that this project can't last
for one and a half years, he
says, yes, this project is more
important, and let's change his
priority from the third to the
second.
I am re-calculating with
the second priority, and I have a reduced
duration of up to eight months.
Thus, we really see that a seemingly
insignificant certain parameter there
priority of projects
can significantly affect the
implementation of the entire strategy
of the enterprise.
That is, it is really a strategic
lever for managing the entire
enterprise.
Classification, project classification,
a very important component
of project activities.
So we continue to consider the control
objects, and we have passed a
significant amount of the object
that we actually define
as a project.
Next on the list of management
objects we have a program of projects.
We have also considered it in part.
The project programme is a
group of projects united
by a common goal.
The next management object is the portfolio
of projects.
We have also been partly concerned with
this object.
And the portfolio of projects, unlike the
program of projects, is primarily determined
by the total pool of resources.
For example, if we say that we are
considering a portfolio of holding
projects, it may mean that we are
considering all the projects
that are performed by all the resources,
primarily the human resources
of that holding.
If we say that we are considering
a portfolio of projects of a subsidiary,
then we are talking about
all the projects that are executed
by that subsidiary and
are executed by the employees
of that subsidiary, that
is, a pool of labor
resources.
Naturally, in addition to labor, as
we have already said, there are
also material and technical,
technological and so on resources.
Thus, we see that a portfolio
of projects can be called a group
of projects united by a common pool
of resources and united by a
common strategy or a common
strategic goal.
In general, a portfolio of projects,
a business process can use very
much different from a business
process management of a
single project.
That is, if we consider the business
process of one project, it can be significantly
different from the business process
of the entire portfolio.
And we will look at these differences in
one of the following topics.
The next object of management is the
life cycle of the project and its phases.
On the slide you see a typical
example of splitting the project life
cycle into separate phases.
The life cycle of a project is the
entire time period that takes the
project from the first action, from
the very beginning of the initiation
to its complete completion.
This period is called the life cycle.
At the same time, within the life
cycle, separate areas with clearly
defined parameters are identified,
which may vary depending
on the location of this part at
the beginning, in the middle,
intermediate or final part
of the life cycle phase.
This division by chronology, by time,
is called the division of the project
into phases.
The life cycle of the project is divided into phases.
The standard division of a project
life cycle into phases usually
combines four phases.
It is a concept or conceptual phase.
The development phase of the subject area
or in English is the design
development phase.
At this stage, we are developing a
project for estimated documentation.
The next phase of the project and the
completion phase.
However, this division is not
dogmatic and the division into phases
of the project life cycle depends
largely on the type of
business.
If we look at the typical division
into life cycle phases according to
the type of business we see in the next
slide, we will see a significant
difference.
For example, if we consider the division
into phases of the life cycle of projects
that are implemented in state-budgetary
organizations of the Russian Federation,
we will see that there are
specific phases.
This specificity is primarily
due to the fact that in
a significant part of projects,
a significant part of contracts,
contracts, under which the work
of state budget organizations is
carried out, we are obliged
to provide for the so-called
tender event.
Accordingly, we have the preparation
of the tender, the holding of
the tender, and this event
is aimed at selecting
the most professional, apologize
for tautology, candidates
among general contractors or
contractors for the implementation
of this project.
And this approach is regulated by
the corresponding package
of documents, and we see that in
a large part of the projects carried
out by state budgetary organizations,
there is a phase of tender
preparation, tender conduct.
Thus, the lifecycle of these
projects can be presented
as follows.
The initiation phase, the tender preparation
phase, the tender conduct, the development
phase, the execution and the completion.
In many projects in the IT sphere, in
the field of information technology, in
many projects of construction business,
other types of business, the first
start-up phase of the life cycle is
usually called the phase of initiation.
It is important to note that
the word initialization is often used.
This is not quite correct, it
is more correct to use the word
initiation.
Although, if you look into the interpretative
dictionaries, you will find what the term
initiation means.
This is, as a rule, a term
that characterizes the formation
of a developing, yet unripe organism,
its transition to the stage of
a mature, mature organism.
Therefore, we can use this term, here
the term initiation, in the sense that
we from the stage of the phenomenon,
from the stage of working with an
idea, translate this idea already
into the state of the project.
This phase can be called
initiation.
Thus, the phase of initiation usually
means the whole set of activities,
which includes the processing
of an idea, the work on an
idea, the determination of parameters
of feasibility, the translation
of this idea into the state
of the project.
The initiator of the project, it
can be a natural person, it can be
a legal person, is working on
the idea.
In this case, such documents are
considered, for example, as protocols
of intent, or the technique
of economic justification, or the
draft of the technical task.
That is, different documents
can accompany this phase, and this
phase really includes an
analysis of the feasibility
of opening the project.
The next phase, for example, the phase
of concept or concept development,
is characterized by the fact that we begin
to consider strategic approaches
to the planning of the organization
and the execution of the
project, as regards the methodological
part.
As for the subject area of the
project, actually design, we in
this phase conceptually consider
how we will construct the
architecture of the project or
the design of the subject
area, the end result, product
or service.
At this stage, a
draft of a technical task
or a sketch project may be
developed.
Next we move to the development
phase, and at this stage the
final version of the technical
task is already developed in detail,
the project, the technical project
and the working project are developed.
If the event itself as a project, it has
a small scale, then it can be combined,
and we see in practice that the combination
of the technical project and
the working project is taking place, and
in this situation in the development phase
of the project a techno-working
project is created.
In short, what is the difference between a sketch
project from a technical and a work project?
Again, the sketch project fixes the general
architecture of the subject
area, the concept.
The technical project unfolds these
conceptual solutions to technical
solutions, to specific technical
solutions.
They are described in this document
in full.
The work project takes the technical
project and specifically applies
to the object.
For example, if we are talking
about a project to create a
local computer network, and there
we have a structured cable system,
then the technical project gives us
all the technical solutions, and
the work project shows that specifically
there, on the third floor of this
building, in such an entrance
we have the SKS through such
a 40 cm of the fence begins,
and then this whole specific
bond is fixed in the work
project.
The work project is the most important
in terms of the operation of
the end product or service of the project.
It is the work project that records
the actual state of what
is done as a result of the project.
It is the work project that carries all
the final accurate decisions, accurate
numbers, and that we must understand.
Then comes the next phase.
stage of implementation or implementation.
Sometimes this phase is called
really differently.
Implementation, implementation and implementation.
This phase is completed by the fact that
we have a finished product of the
project at the output.
Product or service.
Moreover, this phase includes trial
operation or the execution
of the pilot part of the project, where
there is a repair, repair, elimination
of some deficiencies.
and so on.
And the next stage within this phase
is the introduction of the product or
project result into production operation.
As a rule, this is completed by the fact
that we sign the act of receipt and
produce the mutual accounting, financial
and economic accounting between the
participants of the project.
For example, the contractor
to sign the act of delivery receives
the corresponding amount for the services
provided, the works performed
to the customer.
This is all stipulated in contracts,
contracts and other legal
documents that accompany
the project.
Actually, the completion phase
of the project begins with the signing
of the act of handing over the final
product or service into
operation, carrying out mutual
accounts and some subsequent
activities, which I will tell you
a little later.
Thus, we see that the beating
of the project life cycle into phases
is not hardly defined once
and for all, and here the project
manager or top management
of the organization chooses
the most optimal division.
Accordingly, this division into phases
depends on the type of projects and
is recorded in the regulatory documentation.
In general, if we consider
the life cycle of the project,
we will see that over time, in
chronological ranges, as we
move from the first phase, say, initiation
to the final phase of completion,
we see how much the main key
parameters of the project
change.
For example, the exact time of the project
or budget or the characteristics
of the final product.
If we can determine these parameters
with little accuracy in the
initial phase of initiation,
then we must bring this accuracy
to a high level by the
stage of implementation.
In the first phases, say, the initiation
phase, as a rule, estimates of the
budget, the time of the project
are with a plus-minus accuracy
of 50%.
Of course, such estimates
require little resources to evaluate.
Use the resources of an experienced
expert.
Sometimes such assessments are carried out
by top managers of the organization.
That is, in the early stages
of the project life cycle, we can
use small resources to determine
the main parameters of the project,
as I said, such as time, budget,
resources, labor,
other resources.
And this can be done, say,
one expert, several experts or
top managers.
In this phase, we usually
perform intuitive assessments.
That is, a specialist, based on
his previous experience, based on
knowledge, based on skills, based
on internal sensations, can give
these assessments.
If these estimates need clarification,
then experts are involved
and thus accuracy increases.
But in rare cases, more time-
consuming, powerful tools are
used in the initiation phase to determine
the key parameters of the project.
This usually happens in the
next phase.
I have already talked about the balance between the objectives and
objectives of the project.
When we have determined the goal of
the project, when we have fixed the
position where we are in the pre-project
survey, when we have determined the
paths that we can move from
the state that we have before the
project to the state that we will
have after the project, in this situation
we already on each of the possible
ways of implementation of
the project should evaluate the
key parameters of the project
more accurately.
And here, as a rule, accuracy
is used 30%, not worse.
This phase can be called either
conceptual or the phase of choice.
As we can see from the slide,
at the selection phase, the key
parameters of the project are compared
to different options.
The optimal solution for the implementation
of the project is selected.
After this optimal option has
been chosen, a tender on the terminology
of state budget organizations
has been conducted, we are
already moving to the final
planning of tasks and works
on this chosen project
implementation.
At the exit we should get documents
and assessments of the key parameters
of the project already with more meaningful
accuracy.
Usually it is 5%.
In large and complex projects, especially
this shows the experience of Western Europe,
the experience of the United States,
the accuracy of the key parameters
of the project at the completion
of planning should be about 2%.
For example, if we have a project
budget of $1 billion and we
have a project that is very
significant, complex, complex,
large-scale, it is clear that
if we plan its execution with
little accuracy, let us assume
10%, then 10% of the $1 billion
is $100 million.
With such accuracy, of course, no
owner, no CEO in our understanding,
or the president of the holding
company in the West, he will
not sign the documents for the
opening of the project.
It is clear that in such a situation,
the normal accuracy, which may be
acceptable, is significantly better.
Usually it is 2-1%.
We can talk about the budget
accuracy.
In general, if we have a budget
of 1 billion, then the spread
or accuracy may be acceptable 10
million, but not more.
This is 1 percent accuracy.
Thus, we see that the
project planning process
is iterative.
If in the initial phases we
determined parameters with little
accuracy, then in the subsequent
phases this accuracy increases,
increases and increases.
And the ultimate accuracy is determined
by the quality of project management,
and the capabilities of the owner or
management of the enterprise,
the capabilities of reserve resources,
the capabilities of allocating
funds for risk coverage.
In fact, the level
of uncertainty, accuracy or error
on the other hand, from which
we can determine key parameters,
this error should be
covered by those reserves
that we allocate to the
elimination of unforeseen
situations or, as we say,
to risk management.
As a rule, this error should
always be covered by the budget,
a budget article called the budget
reserve, which in enterprises
of mature business level
is called the budget for
the coverage of project
risks.
When we approach the implementation
of the project, accuracy at our maximum
and here all documents, all calculations
are verified and only after that
we can give the entire package of documents
for the opening of the project,
for signature to the general director
or the relevant official.
Then the project is started.
Here, there should be a difference in
methodological approaches in the field
of management, in the field of
project management.
The methodological approaches
may vary greatly depending,
I have already told you, on
the project environment.
For example, if in the United States
projects are surrounded by a clearly
verified financial economic
situation, legal, laws are
carefully prescribed and regulated,
including project activities,
then in Russia, especially during
the restructuring period, the
situation was slightly
different.
And many laws are unclear,
ambiguously regulated our activities,
business, including
project activities.
Hence the objective basis for
what we in Russia to manage projects
should be a little different.
The life cycle of the project should
cover activities that are already
at the start of the project, and
should include a clearer definition
of the conditions for planning
and implementation of
the project.
A clearer definition of the project
objectives, many parameters
of project execution, strategic approaches
and methods.
And, accordingly, this requires a more
clear analysis of the consequences of achieving
the project objectives.
These moments greatly differ the life cycle
of the project in Russia and the life
cycle of the project, for example, in
the United States.
It is therefore clear that not
all the methods that are successfully
used in the West can be effectively
used in Russia.
We must understand this, and we have
no right, as they say, to take, thoughtlessly,
blindly, those methods recommended
to us that are successfully
used in the West, and apply
them in Russia.
In some situations, this will
not lead to success, and in
some situations, using these
methods can only harm us.
We must be careful about
this and work in this direction.
In the project activity in Russia, the
phase of initiation and the phase
of completion is very important.
We must allocate the appropriate resources
for the qualitative, professional
consideration of these phases,
planning of the work on
these phases.
When you start to be interested in issues
such as whether or not there is project
management in the enterprise,
in principle, you can look at the
essence, for example, the completion
phases.
If a project management
system is implemented and it
is effective, the content
of the project completion phase
in such an organization is very
different from the completion
phase in the organization,
where the management
methods can even be present,
but they do not
actually work there.
The example.
Often it is said that a project
is completed when the acceptance of
the results of the project, product
or service is signed and financial,
economic relationships
between participants are carried out.
That is, in accordance with, say,
the contract or contract we perform
those items that prescribe the
following that the customer
is obliged to sign the act from
the reception department
within, for example, five bank
days to pay the executor
such an amount for the work done.
As a rule, many companies say
that this event and the
project ends.
However, if we look at the
situation more closely, we will see
that in those cases where managers
of the management of the enterprise,
top management, counsel and
care that the activities, project
activities of the enterprise,
business went more
efficiently.
In the slides, we immediately recall
that the word “efficiently” we interpret
as follows.
Profit is growing, royals
are increasing, return on investment
is corresponding.
In these enterprises, the content of the
completion phase is completely different.
The completion phase in these
enterprises only begins with the signing
of the act of acceptance and carrying
out the mutual accounts.
And the main content, the work in
this phase, it follows these activities.
I will explain.
In those enterprises where
a project management system is
developed and implemented, and where
it essentially works and works
effectively, there is an
analysis of the project.
Any phase of completion of the project
in such an enterprise, regardless
of the type of project we
use, what life cycle we consider
and what division into phases of
the life cycle we use, any
phase of completion necessarily
contains such work as preparing a
summary project report, summarizing
results, analysis of results,
conclusions and recommendations
on the project performed.
And this happens in such a way that
we, after conducting the next project,
accumulate experience, our enterprise
becomes more mature, it absorbs
this experience.
And already in the next project
of this type, or in a project
related to this type of business,
we are, as they say, not on the
same rocks.
We do not repeat the same mistakes.
We analyze the project for its
strengths and weaknesses.
We will further publish and actively
use the strengths, achievements
in the project, successful solutions,
and try to bypass the
negative moments and failures
in the following projects.
This is achieved by the fact that the
completion phase of the project
is the analysis of the project,
and this analysis gives the results
in the relevant business process,
which adjusts through the
reengineering process of
business processes, in fact,
and the project management
process itself.
Other business processes involved
in the project activities.